You've mentioned that we just might make contact with aliens, or at least hear from
them within this century.
Can you elaborate on your intuition behind that optimism?
Well, this is pure speculation, of course.
Of course.
But given the fact that we've already identified 4,000 exoplanets orbiting other stars, and
we have a census of the Milky Way galaxy for the first time, we know that on average, every
single star, on average, has a planet going around it, and about one-fifth or so of them
have Earth-sized planets going around them.
So just do the math.
We're talking about, out of 100 billion stars in the Milky Way galaxy, we're talking about
billions of potential Earth-sized planets.
And to believe that we're the only one is, I think, rather ridiculous, given the odds.
But how many galaxies are there?
Within sight of the Hubble Space Telescope, there are about 100 billion galaxies.
So do the math.
How many stars are there in the visible universe?
A hundred billion galaxies times a hundred billion stars per galaxy, we're talking about
a number beyond human imagination.
And to believe that we're the only ones, I think, is rather ridiculous.
So you've talked about different types of, type 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 even, of the Kardashev
scale of the different kinds of civilizations.
What do you think it takes, if it is indeed a ridiculous notion that we're alone in the
universe, what do you think it takes to reach out, first to reach out through communication
and connect?
Well first of all, we have to understand the level of sophistication of an alien life form,
if we make contact with them.
I think in this century, we'll probably pick up signals.
Signals from an extraterrestrial civilization will pick up their I Love Lucy and their Leave
It to Beaver, just ordinary day-to-day transmissions that they emit.
And the first thing we want to do is to A, decipher their language, of course, but B,
figure out at what level they are advanced on the Kardashev scale.
I'm a physicist.
We rank things by two parameters, energy and information.
That's how we rank black holes, that's how we rank stars, that's how we rank civilizations
in outer space.
So a type 1 civilization is capable of harnessing planetary power.
They control the weather, for example, earthquakes, volcanoes, they can modify the course of geological
events, sort of like Flash Gordon or Buck Rogers.
Type 2 would be stellar.
They play with stars, entire stars.
They use the entire energy output of a star, sort of like Star Trek.
The Federation of Planets have colonized the nearby stars, so a type 2 would be somewhat
similar to Star Trek.
Type 3 would be galactic, they roam the galactic space lanes.
And type 3 would be like Star Wars, a galactic civilization.
Then one day I was giving this talk in London, at the planetarium there, and the little boy
comes up to me and he says, Professor, you're wrong, you're wrong, there's type 4.
And I told him, look kid, there are planets, stars, and galaxies, that's it, folks.
And he kept persisting and saying, no, there's type 4, the power of the continuum.
And I thought about it for a moment, and I said to myself, is there an extra galactic
source of energy, the continuum of Star Trek?
And the answer is yes, there could be a type 4, and that's dark energy.
We now know that 73% of the energy of the universe is dark energy.
Dark matter represents maybe 23% or so, and we only represent 4%, we're the oddballs.
And so you begin to realize that yeah, there could be type 4, maybe even type 5.
So type 4, you're saying, being able to harness sort of like dark energy, something that permeates
the entire universe.
So being able to plug into the entire universe as a source of energy.
That's right.
And dark energy is the energy of the Big Bang.
It's why the galaxies are being pushed apart, it's the energy of nothing.
The more nothing you have, the more dark energy that's repulsive, and so the acceleration
of the universe is accelerating because the more you have, the more you can have.
And that of course is by definition an exponential curve.
It's called the de Sitter expansion, and that's the current state of the universe.